---
author: markglenn
layout: post
title: Coders' survival guide to Startup Weekend
description: Guide to startup weekend for programmers
keywords: startup,startup weekend,entrepreneur,programming
comments: true
categories:
- General
tags:
- entrepreneur
- social
- startup
---

As you may or may not know, [Startup Weekend](http://startupweekend.org) is
weekend where business developers, coders and designers get together for one
long weekend and try to create a startup project from idea to production. This
may seem strange to the general coding population where timelines are measured
in months, but with the right idea and enough motivation, things can happen.

<!--more-->

I've personally gone to two of these outings in
[Chicago](http://chicago.startupweekend.org/) and will be going to my third on
November 12-14th. It's right across the river from Union Station this year, so
it's easy to get to. Oh yeah, and it's a place where coders are forced to
interact with artists and MBAs.

Hey! I saw that. You're reaching for the back button. You're thinking that you
deal with *those types* 5 days a week. Or maybe you're having a panic attack
just thinking about talking to someone who has never taken a side on the
vim/emacs holy war (by the way, vim is clearly superior). Well don't worry,
everything is going to be okay. It may even be... \*gasp\* ... fun.

Well, there's a few things a coder has to think about before stepping into the
building. If you think about these things before hand, it will help you be
successful at your first startup weekend.

## 1) This is a social event

Yes, it's a social event. Sure some ideas become products, and possibly a few
may become successful startups, but you're here to mingle. This is what the
first night is all about. For the first hour or so, everyone gathers around and
just talks. Here you can ask people what they are (biz dev/designer/coder),
what they do for a living, etc. Just small talk. Find some people who you
wouldn't mind working with or just someone to follow on twitter. A lot of these
people will have blogs, be active on twitter and facebook, and are just plain
social. Use this to your advantage. People **will** come up to you. Be friendly
and social.

## 2) Ideas are free, as in freedom

Everyone has an idea for the next big thing. You'll probably hear 50 or more
during the pitch session. Don't be afraid to tell people your million dollar
idea. Hey, this is your chance to find some people to help you actually finish
that project. [Don't worry about people stealing your ideas. If your ideas are
any good, you'll have to ram them down people's
throats](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Howard_H._Aiken).

## 3) You are a rare commodity

Sadly, there aren't a ton of coders that show up to these events. You'll find
that people will keep coming up to you. Every project needs programmers,
sometimes more than one. There are just not enough to go around. Ideas die
quickly when a group can't find coders. Use this to your advantage and pick the
idea you really like. Chances are they could use another coder.

## 4) This is a social event

Yes, again. I know that we all didn't follow this career path because of our
interpersonal skills. I know that sitting behind a keyboard with your
headphones on for hours a day doesn't exactly make you an extrovert. I know
this because I'm like you. But, for this event, you have to try being social.
If you get caught up in a long conversation, just tell the person you're
looking forward to possibly working with them and ask for a business card so
you can stay in touch. You're here to make contacts. Oh yeah, bring business
cards, even if they just have your blog on them. $20 buys you 100 cards, more
than enough to pass out over the weekend. I just ordered a few from
[overnightprints.com](http://www.overnightprints.com/businesscards).

## 5) It's a long weekend...

Yes, it's a long weekend. Food is usually covered, but everything else is on
you. You won't have a lot of personal space. Actually, you'll probably have
someone come up to you every few minutes asking how things are going. Be
prepared and have your headphones with you for when you need that heads down
coding time. Tell the people you're with that you need a half hour of
uninterrupted time to get the next feature. If there's a special drink or food
that keeps you going, make sure you're stocked up. You're going to need the
energy.

## 6) Ruby on Rails is king

Just get over it. Your Java skills won't cut it. Your late night hacking on the
Linux kernel won't give you much help this weekend. Ruby and Ruby on Rails
seems to be very popular at these things. The one thing that rails gives you
that other frameworks don't is the fast scaffolding of an application. Python
junkies can still be useful as a few groups will go towards the
Django/Pylons/etc. route. You can even go as the sole developer in a group if
you find yourself better than average at another MVC framework.

Also, that windows laptop really won't cut it. I hate to say it (as I'm typing
on my Windows 7 laptop), but Ruby on Rails sucks on Windows. No worries though,
just download [VirtualBox](http://www.virtualbox.org/) and the latest copy of
[Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/desktop)and go wild. Installing Rails on Ubuntu
is a breeze if you follow the [simple
instructions](http://excid3.com/blog/2010/10/ruby-on-rails-3-and-mysql-on-ubuntu-10-10/).
For those still inclined to stick with windows, you can follow [those
instructions](http://accidentaltechnologist.com/ruby-on-rails/running-rails-3-on-windows/)
instead.

## 7) Have fun

This is supposed to be fun. There is a competitive side to it, but mostly
people are there to socialize and have a good time. Don't stress about adding
that last minute feature. Don't stress over the quality of the code. Just get
things done and have fun. Remember, this is probably the only time you get to
prototype something and actually throw away the code and start over if you move
on to production. There won't be any managers telling you: "It looks great,
when can we release it." [Pointy haired
bosses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pointy-haired_Boss) need not apply to this
domain.
